Good morning.
It's good to be with all of you.
Indeed, as you've already heard, we're starting a new year.
And with a new year, we always start with some kind of theme.
And this year, we are transformed.
I think this theme is found throughout our scriptures.
I think this is the desire of God's heart for each and every one of you and for me as well.
This isn't to say this has happened in fullness.
I don't yet proclaim that I'm that butterfly and nor are you.
But that is certainly the goal, right?
And we've got to have somewhere that we're aiming at if we're going to get from the smallest little part here to the eventual butterfly on the other side.
Our scriptures talk about it actually with great regularity, especially once you hit the New Testament, but even the Old Testament has these promises and expectations that as we meet God face to face, and as we come into contact with Jesus, we will be transformed.
I wanna read for you just a few of these, starting with Ezekiel, the Old Testament one.
36, 26 to 27, says, I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you.
I will remove from your heart the heart of stone and I will give you a fresh, a heart of flesh.
And I will put my spirit in you and move you to follow my decrees.
And that's one of the big promises of the Old Testament.
that with the coming of Jesus, with the Messiah, there is an opportunity for the indwelling of the Holy Spirit that literally changes us, as we just sang, from the inside out, that we will actually have new hearts.
Not hearts of stone, but hearts of flesh.
And then when we get to our New Testament, we see this is exactly what our writers and what Jesus himself is teaching us.
And so for example, in 2 Corinthians 5,
Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation.
The old has passed away.
Behold, the new has come."
Or 2 Corinthians 3, we all with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another.
For this comes from the Lord who is the spirit.
Or Ephesians 4, put off your old self.
be renewed in the spirit of your minds, put on the new self, created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness, or finally in Philippians 1, being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
The Christian life is not an easy one.
but it is supposed to be an upward trajectory.
It is one of transformation, it is one of growth and even discovery.
We'll confess to you however, there is, as you probably look around in the church, maybe not our church, the church outside these walls.
We notice that there are people who maybe need some more transformation.
among our ranks.
And you might think to yourself, well, boy, if the New Testament is promising all of this transformation, what is going on?
And what has happened to these people?
And then if we're brutally honest, we look inward and we think, well, maybe I've got a little work left to do on myself.
And there's some transformation that still needs to happen right here.
Here's my desperate hope for South from Baptist Church in 2026.
Is that we be a people who are on a path together, supporting one another, locking arms together, encouraging one another on this path of transformation.
Not because we've arrived, but because we need to walk it together.
Let's start with some prayer.
Heavenly Father, God, as we begin this year together,
We start with prayer.
We start with you.
We need your grace.
We need your power.
We need your forgiveness.
And so God, if we are going to put the past behind us, if we're going to put that old self behind us, we need your power.
We need you now.
Jesus, we give you thanks for the cross, upon which you nailed to it all of our pasts, all of those sins and those things that have brought us down, the pain, the hurt, and the ways that we have hurt others.
Jesus, we give you thanks for the cross.
But we know that the cross was not the end.
Resurrection is.
And so Jesus, we give you thanks for resurrection and the possibility of new life.
Got here and now, we entrust ourselves to that new life.
We say we believe that new life is possible in each and every one of us, that through the power of your cross, that each of us can live new creation lives.
metamorphosized lives, transformed lives.
We pray this in Christ's name, amen.
My friend, Mike, one of my few friends from high school that I occasionally keep in touch with, he lives in Virginia.
He came from a very difficult home and never married and he lives alone to this day and now he runs a rescue out of his home.
a rescue for animals.
And one can imagine that he receives lots of abused animals.
And so take for an example, he receives an abused dog, right?
And that abused dog when he goes to feed it, cowers in fear.
That abused dog, despite Mike's loving presence and the safety
of Mike's home and the safety of the rescue that he's created, that dog will still do what?
It will still act out of fear and it still has that abuse sitting somewhere in his head or in his background and so despite all of the promises and the opportunity that is there for the dog until it is trained and transformed into this
new, loving, safe home that it finds itself in, it will still act out of its old nature.
I think this is part and parcel of what it means to live the Christian life.
There is this old way that has been ingrained in our minds, and that with Jesus Christ and the acceptance of salvation, a way has been made into a very safe and loving arms of a father.
But I think most of us, sometimes we still act out of those old ways of being.
And despite the safety and the love and the adoption that the Father offers to us, sometimes we still act out of fear.
Sometimes we still act out of old ways of living.
The transformed life
is coming to realization that those old ways need to be old and gone and done, and that we need to live in a way that embraces the loving gaze of the Father who looks at us and says, you are safe, you are loved, you are mine, and I am transforming you into the image of God that you were created to be.
When I read Romans 12, one and two, this is what I find.
If you'll turn there with me, I'll show you what I mean.
Romans 12 sits at the hinge of the entire book of Romans.
Many of you know Romans to be Paul's magnum opus, the best thing he's written, and it is true.
The theology of chapters one to 11, which is what it is, it's like this grand work of theology,
is unlike anything else he writes.
But as Paul often does in his letters, he has this first part that is theology, and then he bridges into a part that is very practical.
And we are sitting at that hinge right there.
The 12 and through 16 is the practical part of his letter.
And so when we get to this one word in chapter 12, it says, I appeal to you therefore, therefore is doing a whole lot of heavy lifting in this sentence.
It's three Greek letters, but it's doing a whole lot of lifting because it is the hinge on which all of this book sits.
And Paul is saying this, I am appealing to you, therefore, my brothers and sisters, by the mercies of God.
The mercies of God, what he's saying here, is a reference to everything that he has said from one to 11.
And if I can just sum it up very briefly for you, it goes like this.
God loves you.
He sent his son Jesus to die for you.
While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
He wants to adopt us into his family.
He wants to save us and to redeem us.
And he wants to
transform us.
He is a God of love and a God of mercy.
And because of all those things, therefore, I implore you, brothers and sisters, by those mercies that I just talked about for 11 chapters, you should present yourself as a living sacrifice.
Because of chapters 1 through 11,
You should live a different kind of life is what Paul is saying here.
The living sacrifice is a phrase I quite like.
It is a contradiction in terms.
A sacrifice is something that is typically dead, right?
It has been slaughtered.
Certainly in the ancient world, this was true when animal sacrifice was still being practiced.
And so to have a living sacrifice, well, what in the world might that mean?
Let me suggest to you, it means somebody who is living a life in submission to God.
They have given their whole life over day after day after day to the God who is being appealed to in one through 11, described in one through 11 as this God who loves you so much that he sent Jesus Christ to die on our behalf that we might live.
And so we are to present our lives in a living sacrifice kind of way, day after day, submitting our wills to the will of God because we believe that His will is better than is more full than whatever it is that we might bring to the table.
And so we are to present ourselves as a living sacrifice and this sacrifice when done right and from the heart
is a holy sacrifice.
It is set apart, and it is acceptable to God.
And this is our, as Paul says, our spiritual worship.
At least that's what the ESV says.
It's not my favorite translation of this, where it's actually a very odd one.
Some of you, if you've got your Bibles open, you might have something different where it says spiritual worship.
Can anyone shout out if there's especially the word spiritual here?
Does someone have a different word sitting there?
Like truth, yeah, reasonable.
This word spiritual is our word logic actually, which is interesting to me because it's something more rational or again truthful or it's something real.
It's like the really real.
And then the worship, it's not the hands in the air, but like we were just singing together, it's not that kind of worship.
It's again, it's the sacrifice imagery of the priest who is slaughtering the animal and bringing that act of worship by serving the community.
And so it's this real kind of living, it's this real kind of serving.
And if I could just sum up 12-1 for us, it would be this.
in your day-to-day, Monday kind of life, everything we do, minute by minute, is meant to be offered up as a submission to God's will because of what he has done for us by adopting us into the household of God.
And so again, back to the dog analogy.
The sadness of that dog is that he can't walk into the new master's house and live in the freedom and the abundance that he should because there is freedom and abundance there.
And there is a sense of safety and love that is waiting if you just open your eyes to see it.
But over time, as you become accustomed to the ways of the master,
You should be able to look into the Master's eyes and see it is safe, it is good, and I am to be transformed into the very nature of this Master.
That God Himself is trying to transform me into the image of God that we were created in back in Genesis chapter 1.
And so therefore,
by these mercies, by being brought into this household, we are to present our very lives as God's image bearers in the world.
And then it gets to the second verse, which is indeed the verse that will probably guide us for at least a few months, if not hopefully the whole year.
And it's this, do not be conformed
to the world that is around us, but be transformed by the renewing of our minds.
Let's start with the first half.
I once heard a joke that a fish swims up to another fish and says, how's the water?
And the other fish says, what's water?
And the idea is this.
The idea is that
That fish just knows what the surroundings are and knows not to give it a name, water.
It is, for them, the air he breathes, so to speak.
And for you and me, the world, well, the world is just the way things are, at least the way we assume them to be.
And we are not to be conformed to the way that we think things are just supposed to be.
And this looks like a lot of different things, doesn't it?
Sometimes it's what we might think of as like the hot sins of sex and murder and stealing and the like.
But often it's simpler or maybe more complex or secret things like we live in a world of anxiety that we shouldn't be living in or we just embrace it as it is.
Or we live in a world of moral outrage, but we're always outraged at the wrong things it seems.
or we live in the world of consumerism where we just take it at face value that we too are to be these consumers and that we are supposed to just receive constantly rather than actually pour our lives out for other people around us.
Or the world is tribalism and we just assume that's the water we swim in and so we are supposed to swim in that.
Paul reminds us we are not to be conformed by the ways of the world, that we are supposed to name water as water, or the world as the world, and to not give in to those kinds of ways.
So my hope is that every Sunday morning,
You come, you gather together, we gather together, we sing songs of praise.
We remind ourselves of who God is and who we are in Christ.
You hear a message from me that might last 30 minutes, maybe a little longer sometimes.
And then we go out into the world, battle ready for what the world is gonna throw at us.
But if that really is the only model, then I worry for us because I get about 30 minutes of your time.
but the world gets the rest of the time.
And so whatever you're listening to on your podcasts, or you're watching on your televisions, or shows up on your social media screens, whether you realize it or not, that is training you to think in some kind of way.
And you need to say to yourself, is this, is this the world speaking to me?
Or is this the voice of God?
do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind.
Conforming to the world looks a little bit like a sled track.
You know when you go sledding, right, and there's snow on the ground in winter instead of whatever's happening right now.
And you go down the track,
And then it starts to create a groove, right?
And you get enough people going down the groove, then it just automatically takes you where you're supposed to go.
That is conformity, right?
Now being transformed is the opposite of that.
Like where you are going down this track, to be transformed is difficult because it means like hopping the track and then starting a new kind of groove.
And that can be very, very awkward and difficult, hard, scary, indeed, right?
And yet this is precisely what Paul is calling us to.
This is what our scriptures are calling us to, to jump out of the groove that is created by the sleds and to begin to be transformed in different ways.
This is the slightest bit of brain science for us this morning.
A brain too has these grooves, right?
Do you know this?
And like literal physical grooves that as you repeat actions over time and as you do things over time, those grooves get deeper and deeper and deeper.
And then in order to not do that action or to do different actions, you have to create new grooves.
That does not happen overnight.
That does not happen at the flip of a switch.
Sometimes it doesn't happen over weeks or even months.
The toughest of grooves, that needs to happen sometimes three, four, five years, sometimes longer than that.
When we're talking about a transformed life in its neuroscience kind of way, we're literally talking about putting new grooves in our minds.
And I love that Paul says the transformation of our minds, right?
He doesn't know that neuroscience behind all this, but it does take time.
And I guess what I'm asking from you is patience, patience with yourself to take the time it takes.
But endurance, Paul speaks at length about enduring and being persistent and sticking with it
Because transformation, it doesn't happen by making some kind of commitment this morning and saying, yep, you know what, I'm gonna start working out.
This is something that you have to do day after day after day.
Heck, this is what Paul is talking about when he says becoming a living sacrifice.
The problem with a living sacrifice is that it wants to crawl off the altar, but every single day, you've gotta put it back on there and find your way to new grooves that the sled of your life
is creating.
And yes, it's going to be awkward.
Yes, it's going to be hard.
But if the Bible teaches us anything, it teaches us that's where abundant life lies.
So we are to be transformed by the renewal of our minds.
The goal is not just so we're clear to be better caterpillars.
The goal is butterfly, right?
It's not just strengthening our caterpillar selves.
The ultimate goal is something that is wholly and totally different.
I think this is what the resurrection teaches us as well.
Jesus dies and he is resurrected from the dead and he's similar, but he's different.
He still is able to eat with his friends, but he's also
kind of walking through walls and showing up in different places at different times.
That is a form of transformation that we're not gonna get in this lifetime, just in case you're wondering.
However, we are being called eventually to that butterfly state.
And our job is to allow God to work in and through us as we proceed through this life, transforming us
from glory into glory until eventually we get to glory and we are transformed into that butterfly completely.
One of my favorite theologians is a guy named Thomas Merton and he says the biggest human temptation is to settle for too little.
The biggest human temptation is to settle for too little.
Now if this man were like a corporate executive you might think
Oh, he's talking about, you know, climbing the right corporate ladder or something like that.
The man was a monk living in a small monastery in Louisville, Kentucky.
So he wasn't talking about settling for too little in the terms of how the world would describe too little.
I think what he's talking about is we settle for like the caterpillar larva stage maybe, or the smaller, and he's saying no, no, no, no.
We need to think big.
God wants to do a big thing in your soul.
He wants to change you dramatically from the inside out.
And the question is, will you let him?
Will you dream the biggest dreams possible about what God can do in your life?
Or will you settle for too little?
Final question is, how does all of this work?
And the truth is God.
And I don't know.
Those are my two answers.
God does it.
And I don't fully know.
But I do know this.
It doesn't happen in the blink of an eye.
It takes often years or really even a lifetime of transformation.
So get ready for the long game, the long haul, and the day in,
day out work of transformation.
But I also know that it's intentional and it's directional.
That we're pointing toward somewhere.
We're aiming at a goal.
And as I told the kids, the goal is nothing less than becoming like the person of Jesus.
We have a model.
We have someone to look at.
And we have someone to model our lives after.
How do we do it?
I do think it involves sacrifice.
We are living sacrifices.
Our day in and our day out are intended to be sacrificed to the one who sacrificed his life for us.
And I believe that we are what we do.
Your mind is not transformed by thinking about it.
Your mind is transformed by doing something about it.
By actually changing your actions.
And yes, you will fail.
We all do.
but you stay at it and you keep going.
If you want the transformed mind, it starts with living the life of service to God.
Through the repetition of this kind of life, your brain will literally be rewired, but it will take the time that it takes.
And so if you want to be a person of faith, we'll live like a person of faith.
And if you want to be a person of joy, we'll then live like a person of joy.
And if you want your mind transformed into the mind of Christ, as Paul tells us elsewhere, well, then the best thing you can do is to live as Christ lived, to serve others first, to love the world, to die to self, and above all, to submit your will to the will of the Father.
Tonight continues the service we are starting right now.
Tonight
You might think of as our first night in the gym together as we begin this training course.
And if we are going to live transformed lives, it is always going to start with prayer.
It is always going to start with seeking God.
Tonight is a week of worship and prayer.
And my hope is that you come ready
to put new sled tracks in the ground, to maybe hop out of some of the old ones that you've been in, and to regroup your mind.
We are going to spend five nights in the presence of God, putting the old behind us, and striving toward the new.
It is a continuation of this service.
We intentionally did not serve communion.
Actually, I kind of apologize for it.
We probably could have served it this morning and then again this evening.
But I do want to serve communion this evening and we will gather together and we will do so.
And the reason in my mind that is important that we do so this evening is because we will have spent time together praising God, worshiping, contemplating, praying, interceding for one another and confessing.
And then when we take communion, we will do so because we want to live out what Paul says in Romans 12 here.
We are offering our lives as a living sacrifice because of the mercies of God, because Christ offered his life for us.
And so as we take communion, we are reminded of where all this started, which is essentially Romans 1 through 11, that God loves us.
that He's for us, that He's coming after us, that His mercies are new every day, that He has sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to die for us.
And our response, the overflow of our heart to that invitation is to say, yes, I give you my life, I entrust myself to your ways.
Let us pray together.
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
We need you this morning and we will need you this afternoon and this evening and tonight and tomorrow and again and again and again.
God, our gathering is a beautiful thing.
You have told us to gather regularly and to not give that up.
because there is something in the gathering that is important in the transformation process.
We encourage one another.
We spur one another on to your ways.
We teach one another.
We're inspired by one another's stories.
But God, then we have the messy work of the lived life of a Monday and of a Tuesday, Wednesday, classes, school,
We pray that it be a year of transformation.
There's some hard decisions.
There's some new ruts that need to be created and some old ruts that need to get out.
That would give you praise.